- Everyone out there on YouTube, thanks for being here.
So excited to have you watching live.
As always, put your thoughts into the live chat
and we'll try to make them part of the show.
And with that, Marcus, welcome to Talk Bythonomy.
- Hi, Michael, thanks for having me.
- I'm excited to talk about notebooks
and all the notebook things.
This is gonna be a very broad,
not necessarily super deep episode,
but we're gonna talk about a ton of cool
little extensions and widgets and libraries
that you can plug into your Jupyter work and make it awesome.
And I really like talking about these topics
where it's like, oh, that's only a 10 minute commitment
to see if it's gonna help me out or not, right?
And not like some huge framework you gotta learn.
And there's gonna be a lot for people to take away
if they do anything at all with notebooks, I think.
- Yeah, and I think one of the nice things about notebooks
is they're very easy to use.
I think the barrier to entry to you just being able to do something tangible with them is
very low, much more so than maybe a lot of other things.
Yeah, they're very, very welcoming environments, especially if someone set them up for you,
if it's one of the hosted ones, or like if you're not in there trying to configure a
kernel with a special, a special virtual environment, like how do I, how do I get to the right installs
and why is this there?
- Yeah, all the other hubs running on Kubernetes.
- Yes, exactly.
But once you kind of be on that shell
and many people have that set up for them,
then it's ready to roll.
All right, so gonna be tons of fun
to talk about these things,
but before we get to them, let's start with your story.
How'd you get into programming?
- How did I get into programming?
I think sort of started when my parents decided
to buy a computer when I was eight years old,
back in the '90s.
And then at 12, I started to realize,
oh, you can program these things.
And some well-intentioned adult bought me a book on C.
And 12-year-olds and pointers doesn't mix.
It was horrible.
See, the easy parts.
Yeah, exactly.
Just void star star.
Come on, kids.
Get with it.
Yeah, yeah.
That was just conceptual a bit too much for a 12-year-old.
But then luckily, once I got into high school,
they actually taught us Boral and Delphi.
I don't know if you ever came across that.
It was a very easy-to-use, GUI-driven way
to get into programming.
And you could do lots of things even
that a 14-year-old would find exciting, right?
Not just the C-style, "Hello, world,"
and I can print numbers in a loop,
but actually like fun, GUI-like stuff.
- You know, I never used that,
but I used Visual Basic and some Windows Forms
and other stuff.
And I really think even today, that style development,
it's kind of withered and it's too bad, right?
It used to be so amazing.
You would just go over there, you know, button, text box,
I click on this thing, here's what it calls.
The interaction was so simple.
And now you're doing, you know, maybe you're doing the web
and it's like, I'm gonna do web pack.
And then you'll bring in all these things
and I'm doing TypeScript and then it's all CSS and HTML.
And I'm not bemoaning that style of development,
but it's like, that's kind of replaced this.
Just give me a visual of what it looks like
and let me build something simple.
- I feel like it was a very good pedagogical tool
to teach programming and GUI development.
I remember we did find things like rectangles on the screen
that just chased each other around, right?
And that was like, that was a fun way into programming.
- Yeah.
- And I think there's some bits like that still around.
Isn't it?
What's the like programming learning language?
Something with an animal, is it small talk
or the thing with the turtles?
- Yeah, yeah, the turtle where you can do some drawing,
There's that.
- Yeah, yeah.
- There's an Anvil actually,
which is a Python sort of front end
and back end web framework.
- Build blocks.
- It's really, really similar.
My daughter used that to play with it a lot,
but yeah, I would love to see like a visual basic pie
or something like that.
Like that would be so amazing.
- Maybe it exists, yeah.
But like, so that's what I really like started developing
or programming on my own.
Then I went to university.
That was in the early 2000s.
And they taught us mostly Java, but also
sort of a weird mix of logic-oriented programming,
functional programming.
And I really only ever got in touch with Python
when I did my master's in the States during some courses.
And then professionally, I learned proper Python
when I was working in London.
And that was a company, Man Group,
with a lot of really good Python developers.
And back there, I picked up proper Python
and stuck with it ever since.
And if I have a choice, I will stick to it.
It's interesting that we come from--
my background was not that different than yours in some ways.
I did C++ in the early days.
And you think as you advance in your career
and you get more technically capable and stuff,
you would think, well, you're going to be doing
more intense stuff and more like deep dive.
Like now you're writing like kernel drivers.
Like it is for me at least,
and it sounds like you a little,
quite the opposite, like more towards some of these
higher level languages that let you
build really amazing things,
but you're not juggling like pointers to pointers
and like all this crazy aspects, right?
- I think the first thing,
like your expectation that you're describing
is maybe a function of sort of technical expertise.
And the second development, what actually,
what you end up doing, right, is a function of age, right?
That you've like, as you become older,
you focus more on the high levels.
- You just want to get stuff done.
You don't care about showing off
that you can make this compile, right?
- What's the shortest way for me to be?
And very often that's Python.
- Yeah, yeah, absolutely it is.
All right, so some real time follow-ups.
Audiences, help us out here.
Don says, "Delphi is a wonderful way
back into Pascal from the college days."
Indeed, and some of those languages,
Logo was one of these visual building ones,
as well as the one with the cat is Scratch,
which what an amazing name.
I haven't really used Scratch, but that's cool.
All right, how about--
- Cats or animals in general seem to be good metaphors
for teaching programming.
- Yes, they do.
And O'Reilly Publishers, the publisher O'Reilly
has built their entire book series
on unique animals and programming.
All right, well, how about now?
What are you doing these days?
So right now I am a founding partner at Blue Balance Capital.
We are a small independent alternative asset management firm based in Vienna, Austria.
I started this company three years ago with my partners.
Before that, I worked at an asset management firm in London.
Yet before that, I worked at Goldman Sachs as a quantitative analyst.
And so basically, during my professional career, I was always more a sort of data analyst,
rather than a systems developer.
So everything, or most of the things I use Python for are more from the perspective of
here's a piece of data. And I want to sort of analyze that data set to better understand
like, I don't know, a company or an economic trend or an industry or a particular trade.
So I was always interested in Python in the context of like some data set in some insight
that you can glean from analyzing that data set.
How much of that was taking a block of historical data,
like here's the last quarters, and reports or whatever,
versus trying to make predictions,
like real-time trading or other types of real-time
information?
So I think the starting point is almost always
some kind of time series.
And then the asset management for Mancubra
was they were actually developing automated trading
systems.
So it was very much the first thing
you described, where you have an input that is a time series,
you apply some transformation, and then a computer actually
produces trades on the back of that.
Whereas at other times, more like what I do now,
is you think about it, you get some insight from the data,
but then there's also some other real-world considerations
or exogenous factors that you think about as a human person
and then make your decision.
So I think for me, it was the whole gamut of sort of,
the product is a direct trade that a machine puts on
or a trade that you put on,
or maybe just some advice that you give to a company.
- Right, right.
We're thinking that tech,
generally the tech indexes are going down
over the next three months versus,
buy today, sell tomorrow, yeah?
Buy now, sell tomorrow. - Predictions are hard,
- Especially about the future, yeah.
- Yeah, well, especially now with COVID and wars and like.
- I mean, I have been in finance for more than 10 years now,
but I've never seen anything like the last two years.
- Yeah, it's nuts.
- I think much more happened in the last two years
than in the 10 years before.
- It is living through some history, isn't it?
One more question on this background side of things.
You did a lot of work for these other companies like Goldman,
and now you're founding a smaller company.
How do you feel that your programming
and data science background has suited you
to be more of leading this new company?
- I think I have a great sort of education
from both Goldman as well as Man Group.
They're both very technically capable organizations
with a lot of very smart people.
And as I was starting out together with my partners
as a very small team,
one of the things that gave me comfort
is that I have this stack of things
that I know work together,
I understand how they work together
and how to sort of apply them to do useful things.
So having that sort of under your tool belt,
ready to go and not having to figure out sort of how to go together. But just on day one,
here's an AWS instance or EC2 instance, spin it up, get a notebook running and produce some nice
charts like that. That was something very valuable for me to just be able to do very quickly.
Yeah, cool. That's what I would think. And I feel even if you have these skills, even if you're not
the one writing, if you hire a team or you find a consultant, being able to speak with them and
understand like, yeah, no, no, I have a recommendation.
And I think actually this, you know, like, let me tell you, that tool is good, but this
one is better and it would fit.
But I think just that's super valuable.
So I just wanted to kind of check.
Yeah, like I tried, tried and tested stack of tools.
And every once in a while you get to branch off and try some new shiny and see if it works,
see if it sticks.
But having this trusted thing that you know, and how it works is valuable.
Yes.
Like if you're doing JavaScript,
you wanna have a really trusted tool
that's been around for at least a month.
- Yeah.
- And then some, just kidding.
Luckily we don't have it quite that bad in Python.
It's a lot more stability there.
Okay, well, let's talk about this list,
which is why we got together and I invited you here,
is this awesome JupyterList.
Now, what is it, where'd it come from?
I mean, most people are familiar with awesome lists,
but maybe, what's the philosophy of yours?
- Exactly, yes, so Awesome Lists,
they're just like curated lists with resources
that are useful or pertinent to some particular topic.
And then in this case, it's Jupyter Notebooks.
So this is really a list of things that,
like I started it with 20 entries
and then just put it up on GitHub.
And then over time, just more people added to that list
of things they find useful
that have some relationship with Jupyter.
And I think that up to this point,
I think more than 100 people have collaborated
and added things that they find useful to this list.
So it's just like living, breathing thing
of whatever people find useful
that has a relationship to Jupyter.
- I still find these very valuable,
even though a good part of my job...
Yeah, sorry.
Even though a good part of my job is like to track what is new,
what's interesting, what's trending,
I find so many things that are new here.
And when I first got to Python, I was like, wow, look,
it just keeps going.
I just thought there was three web frameworks
or just one way to talk to a database.
Look how many there are.
It's so amazing.
And it's always delightful.
- It's kind of like, you probably remember
like back in the old days of the internet,
you had directories, right?
- I mean, that was Yahoo.
- That was the core search engines, right?
- Yes.
- You had these like catalogs of things
And here's a website that is about cats,
and here's one about dogs.
And in some ways, it feels like in this day and age,
we have come back to you actually
have a person who is keeping some kind of directory of things
that are useful or pertinent to a particular topic.
It's kind of funny that way.
And what's quite interesting for me is sort of one
of the benefits that I have from doing this
is that I see what other people find useful.
And so for myself, I just know,
hey, these are the things that people are using.
And so I've got a good, pretty good radar
of the whole Jupyter and notebook ecosystem
just because I'm sort of curating this thing.
- Yeah, you probably have had people recommend things
and you're like, I have no idea what that is,
but that looks awesome.
So it belongs on awesome Jupyter.
- Like I tried to be very inclusionist with this.
And so when people include things on this list,
I very rare, more often than not, I include them.
And even in the cases where I'm like,
I don't see myself using that,
but I'm sure there's some category of people
who might find that useful and it just goes on the list.
- Yeah, it's, you don't wanna over index
on your specific use of Jupyter and your, right?
because we've got astronomers who are using this stuff.
We've got economists, we've got biologists,
we've got students, right?
It's publishers. - Yeah, yeah.
All sorts of folks, yeah, yeah, yeah.
People who care more about, I don't know,
like keeping, doing their computation on a cluster,
other people who are more into visualization.
You name it, you have it, yeah.
- Right, like ML folks might have one concern.
- A lot of people who use it in education,
that's actually one of the sections in there
is a whole section dedicated to education
and people teaching courses using notebooks
and what the best tools around that is for like,
I don't know, maybe even grading homework assignments
that you distribute to people in the form of notebooks.
- Yeah, I definitely wanna highlight that
because my, I haven't talked about it very much,
but I was a graduate TA, so I graded a lot of calculus,
a lot of linear algebra and various other applied
calculating type things like MATLAB type of stuff
and automating, oh, it would have been good.
Okay, so--
- You just replaced yourself with a regression test.
(laughing)
- Exactly.
Submit your calculus test of a continuous integration.
We'll see how you did.
(laughing)
So there's a couple of sections that I'm not sure
I really wanna dive into 'cause I think,
and they're not exactly the notebook ones,
but one is this collaboration education stuff.
So maybe we could start there.
And let me just set the stage by saying,
a little while ago, I met with Sam Lau, I talked with him.
He and Philip Guo, they did a research project
where they studied 60 different network environments,
not just Jupyter, but like Google Colab and 58 others.
And so just kind of putting it out there,
like you might think just Jupyter
versus JupyterLab is the discussion,
but there's a whole lot of different places
where you can do notebooks, right?
- Yeah, some of them, like you can run on your own machine.
That's sort of what I have
in this runtime/environment section.
those things tend to go in there. And there's a separate
category of I call them in the list hosted notebook solutions
that those are things that you don't really run on your own
machine, but they run somewhere in the cloud. So I think
basically, that is one way you can break them down into
categories is just do you run them yourself? Or do they run on
the cloud somewhere else?
Yeah, one thing that I didn't see on the list, but maybe would
be kind of its own request.
Yeah, right. Here we go. Is the Jupiter JupyterLab desktop app.
Have you seen this?
Not sure I've seen that.
Yeah. So what it is, is it's an electron JS app that bundles the
runtime environment to be JupyterLab. And it comes with
its own Python and everything. So it's a thing you can hand to
somebody that runs locally that lets them do notebook stuff
without them having to have Python installed and set up the
environments and it just kind of has a little wizard to get it started, which is,
I'm not sure I would use it personally, but it's pretty interesting.
Um, it sounds like a very low barrier to entry notebook environment.
Yeah.
Yeah. I think it could be good for, you know, like in a school
environment where you're like, all right, kids just take this and run it.
I don't want to have to debug why you can't install Python three 10, but you
need three seven, you know, whatever.
I think lots of different people have different kinds of Jupyter
or notebook setups.
Mine personally tends to be--
I actually run mine in the cloud because I
find it convenient to be able to access it
from different machines.
So I access it from work, and then I
can access it from my notebook.
Even when I'm at a friend's place or something,
all I need is a browser to access it.
and I can just continue where I left off on the other machine.
>> You can probably be closer to the data, right?
>> Exactly, right, yeah.
You've got a lot faster pipe,
and you're not that dependent on what
your own network situation looks like wherever you are.
>> Yeah, you're just shipping the answer,
not the gig of data required to get the answer.
>> Exactly, right. You've got a pretty beefy machine on
other game that can deal with all the calculation. So I find that pretty cool. At some point I
overdid it and even dockerized the whole thing and then I felt like that was getting more in the way
of it than being helpful. Yeah, like I gave myself a DevOps job. Why did I do that?
Yeah, exactly. I only maintain one of these installations. Why do I dockerize them?
Yeah, that's actually a really good point. I have the same philosophy on web apps. It's like,
"Well, if there's just gonna be one of them,
and it's just me,
how much flexibility does this thing really need?"
Okay.
So yeah, so there's a whole section on these
with honestly many places I haven't heard of
and ways to run it.
But yeah, let's talk about two things
in this collaboration education section.
Three actually, but two are kind of in my mind,
put them together.
One is NBGrader, like real quick.
This is a pretty cool project.
Tell people about this.
- So this is pretty much what I described before
in the abstract.
If you are a person in education and you teach a course
and you want your students to do a particular assignment
and then they send in their submissions,
you don't wanna hand grade them one by one.
If what you can do is formalize basically
what you want the answers to look like
in a form of regression tests.
And that is basically what MVGrader is.
So like you get one notebook
and you define what you want the answers to look like
and then it just does the rest of it for you.
- That's pretty interesting.
- I've never used it myself
because I'm not working in academia.
But like the value prop is obvious with that one.
- Well, I think there's two values here.
Obviously the less effort on the instructor
There's also a little bit of more fairness.
There's an interesting angle.
I'm sure that this is true for grading.
Is it morning and you're rested and patient
or is it late and you're in a rush and you're frustrated?
I don't know which affects which
in terms of how the grades go
but it's gotta have an effect, right?
I was talking to some folks who did machine learning
for discovering planets on Puck Python.
And they said, after the afternoon coffee and cake
or cookies or whatever it was they had at this university,
more exoplanets to be discovered than ever.
(laughing)
- Yeah, I was always told to like call people after lunch.
That's when they are usually most contained
and most open to.
- Exactly, and so there's probably a thing about grading.
So the fact that this doesn't care, it doesn't get coffee.
It gets a lot of time.
- And I think there's also like a social science paper
on like jury verdicts and sort of the harshness
of jury verdicts over time of day, right?
- That's a little bit harsh to think about, isn't it?
Like I got an extra year in prison
because they were grumpy, right?
That's not how a judge should work.
- Yeah, they didn't have their coffee yet.
- Yeah, yeah.
So the other angle that I think is interesting with this
is if you're a student, you get to know
whether or not you passed that question, right?
A lot of times when you're doing complicated things,
it's like, I think this is right,
but if it's not, it's really straightforward,
like a calculus, here's what the formula derivative is,
but it's just slightly more nuanced.
It's hard to know what the right answer is.
And so here you're like, well, the test passed,
so we're good to go, I like that.
- I had a course like that at university once
where you could do multiple submissions
and the system would tell you
like how many points you scored
and it actually is sort of was very motivating
to sort of keep going until you score a perfect answer.
I think having something like that
in a course would be super cool.
- I totally agree.
Before we move on real quick in the audience,
David says, "I use InBGrader for my teaching.
"It's super helpful."
InBGrader identifies wrong answers
and then you can go in and assign multiple credit.
- Yeah, I love it.
That's actually really neat.
Really neat.
Okay.
The other one that's more of a educational demonstration
or exploration is InBeTutor here.
So InBeTutor lets you go in.
Will you tell people about it if you're familiar with this?
- I haven't used it lately.
- So actually I mentioned Philip Guo and Sam Lau.
They did Python tutor,
which lets you go and write some Python code.
And it shows you basically how it executes
and how variables are related with pointers and stuff.
And this is inspired by that.
So what it lets you, not this one,
it lets you basically run a,
what is it a magic command with a percent?
- It's cell magic.
- Cell magic, you run some cell magic to turn it on.
And then to the right of the cell,
that starts showing the pointers
and how things are relating.
So if you're trying to understand computer science
and things, I think this would be cool for teaching.
- And you have your code and all you have to stick on
to get the visualization is this one short cell magic
and you get the rest for free.
That's pretty cool.
- Yeah, it's really cool.
They give credit right here to online Python tutor.
Let's see, there's some other ones.
The Google, the Jupyter drive one
to integrate Google drive looks pretty neat.
I think it's a little bit expired when I opened it.
- It is very, it is definitely more
of the experimental flavor.
- Yeah.
- And I imagine sort of whoever develops this
is also on the mercy of Google Drive
keeping their API stable.
- Yeah, absolutely.
- And so I think that is one way,
or in general, it's a non-trivial question
figuring out how to best store your notebooks.
I mean, if you're just one person,
you can probably stick them into Google Drive.
- Yeah.
- But as soon as you have more than a handful
of people working on the same set of notebooks,
you probably want a solution
that is a bit more sophisticated than that.
- I totally agree.
One of those solutions might be a proper Git story, right?
And some of the tools we'll talk about
are gonna cover that, right?
- Yes, exactly, yeah.
- The other one could be a collaborative,
like a Google Colab or some other,
one of these other environments where it's like Google Docs.
- There's hosted environments that sort of have that
as a built-in or you basically, the other way is
you roll your own and make it Git-based
and both have their advantages and disadvantages.
I think with Git, you always like know a little bit better
what you have and what it does.
Whereas with the other one, that might come
with some other fringe benefits like being able
to comment on it or having versions of the notebook
very nicely integrated with your GUI.
So it's like whatever you prefer, like both work.
- Yeah, the online ones often have like infrastructure
that comes with them too, right?
The ability to press go and run it on a GPU
if you're willing to pay.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
- Yeah, cool, okay.
I think that probably is the interesting ones
that jumped out at me from there.
And then our next one is visualization.
I mean, this is at the heart of the value of notebooks
in the first place.
So, Altair, tell us about that.
- So, I'm very unbiased,
even though I'm not a developer of Altair,
I think what that team has developed is pretty amazing.
I use it for most of the things,
for most of my visualization needs,
or almost exclusively.
What's neat about Altair is that it is declarative,
and it is built on top of a technology,
on top of another package, which is called Vega.
And Vega is a platform agnostic visualization framework.
So basically, what you have to do
is, if you want to have a chart like that,
you just write some JSON declaration of, basically,
Here's your data set.
This is the URL to the data set.
It's a tabular format.
The variable that I want on the x-axis is called foo.
The variable that I want on the y-axis is called bar.
And I want a scatter plot.
And please make origin in this example here.
Please make that the color of the dots.
And you just specify that in a declarative format.
And then what that allows you to do
is you can create this declaration from Python,
but it might just as well be JavaScript
or even like a handwritten JSON, right?
So-- - Right.
There's some kind of JSON data.
Basically Altair generates that data set
that goes down to the next layer, right?
- Exactly.
So like Altair is the Python binding on top of Vega.
And I think sort of declarative systems,
most of the time they have a higher level of abstraction.
They have more concise notation.
And the way I always explain this to people
when they ask about it is,
Vega and Altair is to visualization
what SQL is to data querying, right?
Your SQL query, you can execute that from within Python,
you can execute it from within a GUI.
It's sort of a language agnostic specification
of what data you want to query.
And this is basically the same thing for visualizations.
- Yeah, it looks really great.
There's a beautiful picture of a scatter plot
with a legend and multiple colors
kind of pulling out some nuance in the data.
And it's like, I don't know how many lines of code
put that at maybe four if you didn't multi-line one of them?
I mean, it's really--
>>You can probably golf it together in four lines
if you're-- yeah.
>>Without semicolons.
If you did semicolons, you could do it one,
but that would be wrong.
But like four reasonable lines, you
could do this beautiful picture.
>>And that already gives you a quite impressive visualization.
I think it has some nice defaults,
like it knows how to nicely space the labels on the axes
and stuff like that.
But what it still allows you to do
is build pretty complex visualizations too.
So there's this one example where you basically
have a scatter plot on top, and then on the bottom,
you have something like a histogram.
And you can select the range in the histogram at the bottom,
and there you go.
And then you get this beautiful interactive animation.
And you don't actually have to write any imperative code.
You just specify what you want.
And Altair and Vega kind of do the rest for you.
So I write some JavaScript.
But years ago, I used to see these really nice and beautiful
animations that were built on D3.
And I'm like, I want to do cool stuff like that.
That's really pretty.
But I don't know any JavaScript.
And I feel like this is like leveling the playing field
a little bit more and it allows you to do similar things
from within Python.
- It's really nice.
One of the things that I think it's a little ironic
is for the people who create these tools,
like the people who created Altair,
they have to write so much JavaScript
and not that much Python, right?
'Cause they're building these interactive,
beautiful experiences on the front end for us.
We get to write the Python
And there's like a lot of that complex JavaScript
is encapsulated into these tools
that we don't have to think about,
but we get to use, which is great.
- It's a dirty job, but somebody's gotta do it.
And like, I have a lot of appreciation
what those folks are doing for the rest of us.
- I do too.
All right, so Altair is number one,
right on the visualization.
I mean, it doesn't hurt that it starts with A,
but also maybe one of the best ones.
- Some of the other shout outs.
- In all fairness, these things are usually alphabetized.
Every once in a while, I put things in the wrong place.
And by now I even built myself a linter
that keeps the lists nicely alphabetized.
- I'm sure that makes a lot of sense.
So, bokeh is one that's out there that's pretty well known.
- People use a lot, yeah.
- Yeah, yeah.
Do you know one that I saw recently?
Yeah, go ahead.
- There's a lot of them, right?
- There are.
- I think when you talk about visualization,
the other very popular ones are probably Matplotlib,
which probably was one of the first plotting engines
for our backends for Python.
And then Seaborn, which kind of like builds on top of that.
- Right, yeah, absolutely.
Seaborn is nice.
One that I've seen just recently on notebooks is TQDM.
I've always used this from CLI applications.
And TQDM is a way to just take a for loop
and whatever you're gonna loop over,
you just put that in TQDM, bracket that thing,
and it becomes this live animated progress bar.
Which is really neat.
but I've only thought of this as a terminal CLI type of thing
but it works in notebooks too, I just learned, right?
- Yes, it does.
TQDM is one of those like does exactly what it says
on the team kind of things.
It does one thing and it does it very, very well.
- Yeah, it's not an incredible output,
but at the same time, it's like, you know what?
I wanna have a little bit of feedback for the users
or for myself.
And you're like, okay, it's just literally
wrap your iterator in TQDM.
I mean, it's a very natural thing to want.
Just imagine you've got some long running computation
over a loop, and you just don't want
to stare at a blank screen for two minutes.
You can kind of see how maybe the idea developed from there.
I've got a lot of those type of things.
Brian out in the audience says, "HV plot, HoloViews, Bokeh,
and panel are all awesome and tightly interconnected.
Yeah, those are really nice.
Okay, all right, so next one is the publishing.
This might be also a little bit
at the very heart of notebooks.
The original idea of the notebook was,
I wanna have some explanation
and then some executable code and then some visualization
and turn almost like I want to tell the story
of a research project or something like that, right?
And so this section, it's right there, isn't it?
- Yeah, exactly.
I think it's sort of less clear what this category is
as compared to some of the others,
but it is basically anything in sort of that space
of how do you run it?
How do you tell a story with a notebook?
How do you point out little things inside those notebooks?
One of the entries in there that I find quite interesting
and useful, and it's also pretty awesome
from a technical perspective, is Binder.
So what Binder allows you to do is
you can basically take any GitHub or even GitLab
or other hosted Git solution URL and put it in there.
And then what Binder does is it builds a Docker image
that has all the dependencies of those notebooks
and builds that image, finds an executable node somewhere
in the cloud in their infrastructure,
and then points you to a Jupyter instance
that has that notebook running.
So what it allows you to do is you see a notebook on GitHub,
and you're like, jeez, what if I want
to poke around with this thing.
You just go on binder, put in the URL
and you can play around with a notebook interactively.
- It's really cool.
So people have seen the launch binder,
little tag or whatever you call that on,
on like a GitHub repo or somewhere else.
I guess it could even be in an article
that's then just points back over to one of these.
If you click it, it just, as you said,
it's gonna create an executable environment
with the right dependencies
and let you run your code there, which it's kind of impressive
that that's available to the world openly, publicly,
without authentication, right?
- Yeah, I mean, it's an incredible engineering feat, right?
Just all the considerations of like finding a node
that has like sufficient sort of resources available
to be able to do that, assembling.
I mean, basically you don't know what people
are gonna throw at you in those repos, right?
And they're doing a pretty good job
at sort of making a whole lot of notebooks executable.
- I had Carol Willing, among others on the show recently
to talk about Mastodon,
and we talked about like the federated storing.
There's a bunch of people who are creating servers
and allowing others to use it,
sort of volunteering to add a little bit of resources.
And she said, a lot of what she sees over there
actually was there's some parallels over in the binder
space about how certain universities and other places
are--
we'll set up the ability to run some of these binders
to add a little bit of compute and resource to the world.
And yeah, it's similar.
- I think it's very amazing.
From what I can see, what goes on behind the scenes there
is some of this I think is the execution
is run on Google hardware.
So like, and then the beyond Google,
they have three other hardware providers.
So not only do they manage to sort of make
all those notebooks executable,
but they even run them on four different sets
of infrastructure, which is pretty amazing.
- Yeah, very cool.
Okay, so a couple of others,
Another one here that really jumps out at me
is Jupyter book over, let me pull up there.
So build beautiful publication quality books
and documents from computational content.
Now really nice, huh?
- Yeah.
So I think they basically,
I think there's a couple of sort of projects
that try and do similar things,
which is basically you create a set of notebooks
and then you either get a webpage or you get a book.
And two of the things that these are useful are,
well, one, you're trying to write a book
about some subject matter,
like a machine learning book or something like that.
And the other case where it's really useful
is documentation, right?
If you are a developer or a maintainer of a software package
and you want to document your API,
something like that can be very useful.
What this gives you is not only the ability
to write documentation,
but also to include code in that documentation.
And then in some cases, if you have the binder link,
you can even set it up so that you've got a piece of code
in there and people by clicking a tab next to it
can even try out what that code does,
fiddle with it a little bit and then see what that does.
It allows you to do some pretty cool stuff.
- That's a pretty interesting way to bring it back around.
Like we've taken this computational thing, got it going,
turned it into a static book that you have,
but if you click this button, you can go back.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
- Yeah, one more, go ahead.
- Yeah, what we just talked about also
sounds very much like NBDev,
which is actually a project that has a very similar flavor
where it's specifically geared towards people
who write software packages.
And the idea there is that you take your code
and you define your classes inside of a notebook.
And then people can, so you can both actually have your code live inside that notebook.
You can also define your tests in that notebook.
And then some added benefits that you get from that is you can run your tests from a
notebook and these things don't live in seven different places like your code base and then
and your test base, and then your documentation repo,
but they all live together in one space.
And if you make a change that influences
or has an impact on all three of them,
you don't need to do it in three places,
but you can just do it in the notebook
where it's all together.
- Of all the things that plug into Jupyter,
I think I'm most impressed with NvDev.
It's really, it's pretty nuts.
- Yeah, yeah.
I think this is Donald Knuth, right?
He called this a literate programming environment.
And I feel like this is the kind of stuff he envisaged
way back in like '83 when he wrote his book
about literate programming, right?
This is really what he had in mind.
- It took a while to get there.
Yeah, the tools he was working with,
they weren't like these.
Yeah, so with MBDev, you can have your documentation,
you can publish, you can take your notebook
and export it or convert it into,
or build it into a Python package or a Conda package,
you can publish it to PyPI and Conda.
You can have tests, you can have continuous integration.
Then also you can, if you've got complicated code
that you need to integrate in other ways,
you can sync it to Python files and then back.
I think that two-way integration is pretty cool for this.
I really need to get this out of the notebook
into Python directly, but then don't just carve it off,
like keep them sort of connected, right?
- Exactly, I think that's one of the key points there
is that AMP BDEV allows you to do all of these things
in the same place, right?
Sure, you can do all of these things separately
and a lot of people do them separately,
but then having them all in one place
is just so much easier when you say, make an API change.
- Yeah, another one which wasn't really even
shouted out there in that highlights that they have
is in be clean, which if you're doing,
and we talked about the two possible ways for collaboration,
if you're doing the get way, you know,
these notebooks, their files contain the output,
which could-- - Yes, yeah.
- They're rerun it, it's a merge conflict, right?
And so this will strip out that kind of information
to avoid merge conflicts.
so it can be a real good way to sort of prepare it.
I suspect that could be a Git pre-commit hook.
I'm not sure, but probably.
- Yeah, that's one way to do it.
And sort of, I think sort of the fact
that the notebook format contains the cell output
and also some meta information is a bit of a blessing
and a curse at the same time.
On one hand, sort of when you have a notebook file,
you can load it up and you immediately see the output
without having to run the cells, right?
So imagine someone sends you a notebook file
and you cannot run it on your machine.
You still get the benefit of seeing what their output was
when they generated it.
So it's nice for that.
It's also nice for the fact that if you put it up on GitHub,
GitHub can render this notebook file with the output
in a very nice and sensible way.
You immediately see what the output was.
But the disadvantage of doing that is that whenever you rerun it,
the contents of that file change,
and it doesn't produce clean diffs, for example.
If you just change one line and then that line produces a block,
your diff might be a couple of kilobytes long, right?
And you don't want that.
And one of the tools that deals with that
is something we had on the list, Chupytext.
So Chupytext is basically,
so Chupytext deals with this problem
by basically giving you paired notebooks.
So you have an IPNB file and you tell your Jupyter IDE,
In addition to that IPNB file,
I also want a markdown file or a PY file
that contains just the input cells.
And then what you can do is if you want to version
your notebook is just check in that clean or stripped
PY file or markdown file and rather ignore the IPNB.
So that is what we actually do in our company.
we have a couple of notebooks that serve as a reports
and we edit them collaboratively.
And the way we version them is by stripping out the output
via two-byte text.
And so you really get nice clean diffs
and when someone makes a change,
you can tell what they changed in a reasonable way.
- Okay, yeah, that's super valuable.
I do wanna go back to the mbdev for just one second
because there's a big long list here
that you would get if you just ran nbdev help.
And so many that you're like, as a standalone command,
they'll be like, oh my gosh, what an amazing tool.
Like another one I just saw is nbdev changelog,
which will create a changelog.mb file
just from like your closed and labeled GitHub issues.
And you know, like that's a cool feature on its own.
I could see installing that and never even using a notebook
and just running that on my Git repo, which is, you know.
So there's a bunch of neat things here.
- You know, like you look at the list, right?
You look at the list and what MB dev does
for more than five minutes,
and it makes you want to build a software package.
- Yes, it does.
Which you could do with MB dev by the way.
So that's kind of meta.
All right, let me clean up a few of these things here.
Another one around there is MB convert.
- Yeah, so MB convert is, I mean, it's almost there
in the name, right?
Basically, one thing it gives you
is a command line command where you can do nbconvert foo.ipnb
and say, I want to convert this notebook to HTML.
So you can script the conversion of notebook
on a command line level.
And then beyond that, what you can do with nbconvert
is also accessible as a Python package.
So you can control that notebook conversion
from within your Python code.
And that is useful for a number of things
when you really want fine-grained control
over how you execute or convert your notebook.
So one of the things that I have built with that
is basically a way to convert notebooks
without the input cells.
So if you wanna build a report out of a notebook
and you have a non-technical audience
and you wanna get the code out of their way
and you really wanna just show them the output,
that is something you can build with nbconvert.
- That's really cool.
I hadn't realized it did that.
So here's what I wanna show you.
And if you actually wanna see the code,
click this binder version or view it statically on GitHub.
- Yeah, exactly. - But for most people,
they just wanna see here's the description
and here's the figures, right?
But it's still potentially accessible at least.
- Yeah, yeah, totally.
And I think notebooks are actually
a quite nice way to design a report, right?
Because what you have is building blocks
and my report is I want the total number of orders
for the last week and I want a chart.
And then I want like the number of orders
by zip code or whatever.
And you build that in a notebook
and then you just like in be converted
with the input stripped out and you get an HTML file
that you can serve on a web server
and have something like a dashboard for your team.
So it's super cool for building things like that.
- Yeah, yeah, very neat.
Okay, carry on here.
One more in this section before we move on.
There's a bunch, but I think Paper Mill is pretty unique.
Do you wanna tell people about Paper Mill?
- I haven't, to be honest, I haven't used it that much.
- I haven't either, but I did read this
Netflix Paper Mill article about what they were doing.
And they were basically using--
- Cobb-Kelley, yeah.
- Yeah, they were doing some work to take notebooks
and use those as like building blocks
for managing their infrastructure.
So there were a lot of interesting benefits
and Paper Mill will let you basically turn the variables
at the top of the notebook into inputs
and then the variables at the end of the notebook as outputs
and you could treat it like a function.
So they're chaining these together for all sorts of crazy
DevOps-y type things, I believe.
It basically sounds like something I once rolled my own of,
where basically what I just described that I'm doing with nbConvert,
I once built a version where you could, in the first cell,
have a variable and serve that like a function input,
and it sounds like they probably did a much better job of
Imagine you have a dashboard and then you've got one for the US and you want one for international orders, right?
Or for canadian or heavy country, right?
Um, you can basically do that out of the same notebook file
Um, but just say hey, these are two separate versions
One for the us one for canada one for mexico, whatever
Exactly. One of the benefits that they said they were getting was if something goes wrong like if a step crashes
because as you described the notebook,
as it executes, it stores the exact output and the inputs.
It's a snapshot in time of what happened when it went wrong.
So instead of just having a log message of it went wrong
and here was the input, it's like,
well, here are all the steps
and you can see the variables and the output coming
and then here's the crash.
You're like, oh, look, these are the three inputs
and here's how this one got--
- It actually gives you nice diagnostics.
- Yeah, it's like a report of what went wrong.
- It's almost like a,
you have these parameterized tests, right?
It is a parameterized test with some diagnostic output
about what went wrong during that execution.
That's pretty cool.
>>Yeah, it's unique.
So I think worth a shout out, I suppose, there.
How about the version control side?
Anything you want to give a shout out to there?
That is a section that is a bit more well-defined and clearer
what goes in there.
It's basically all sorts of tools
for diffing, merging, code reviewing, changes in notebooks.
Nbdime is probably one of the more well-known packages
in that category.
That looks very well-built.
- Basically, so imagine you have an image, right?
In an IP and B file,
you would usually get like a horrendously large diff
if one of the things in that image changes.
And this just displays it,
that that diff not has 50 lines that change,
but just like a neat,
here's something that changed one line
and doesn't mess up your whole diff.
- Right, this plot changed, not these 700 lines
of plot definition change.
Yeah, yeah, very cool.
And merging as well, which is neat.
All right, well, we're getting a little short on time.
Let's see, I wanna, I know you wanna give a shout out
to DeepNote, both because you like them,
but also they're a sponsor of the--
- They support the list, yes.
- They support the list, yeah.
So maybe tell us about them.
- So DeepNote is basically one of these
hosted notebook solutions.
We already mentioned Binder.
We already mentioned Colab.
And they have built one that is a bit more centered
around collaboration of teams.
You also get an execution environment
with different sets of hardware from them.
And they really emphasize collaboration.
So you can comment and have discussions
about individual cells in your notebook,
you can very nicely see what changes other people did
to your notebook and all of that in a very well-done,
very dense GUI that makes a lot of things very easy for you.
So if you're not already using one of these environments
and you have a team that is maybe also not
sort of particularly technically focused
on like where it runs, how it runs,
This is a very turnkey solution.
- Right, less DevOps, more Google Docs type of style.
- They solve a lot of those problems for you.
- Yeah, it looks really neat.
The collaboration seems very, very nice.
I think that's a pretty unique thing
to do in a polished way.
- Yeah, and they also have nice integrations
for a lot of data sources.
So you can directly query SQL from their GUI
in PySQL results into a data frame, right?
So you can, you have one cell where you write your SQL
and that goes directly into the data frame
that you can then visualize in the next cell.
So the ergonomics of EepNote are probably better
than many other notebook solutions.
- Yeah, that's pretty neat.
And so, like you said, it's worth pointing out
they're a sponsor of your list, not of our show,
but they are a commercial thing,
but they are commercial venture,
but they do have a free version.
You know, there's just,
there's something for me where
I feel like it's,
I kind of like to support companies
that are purpose built, right?
Like DeepNote is built for running notebooks
and collaboration,
whereas a lot of these big tech things,
it's like, well,
I know Facebook's a social media company,
but I could also do this other thing
that runs on, or I could run this on Google.
And there's something about like, okay,
there's a company whose only job is to do this
versus like, I'm not sure I could ever get support.
Like if I had a problem with my Gmail,
I don't know that I could ever get help, ever, right?
Whereas like, if I went to an email company
and got email from them, they would help me with email
'cause it's their thing, right?
- And I think where it shows is that
they spent a lot of time thinking about
how people use notebooks and what they want to do with those notebooks. And sort of, they think a
bit beyond just sort of the Jupyter technical, but more the ergonomics of how you actually use
a notebook within a team. And I think sort of, you can definitely tell that they know how to
use notebooks and have thought about all the ways in which people use notebooks and how to make that
- Nice, well, I've never used them,
but if I have the need, I'll check it out.
Sounds good.
All right.
What else?
Maybe we got time for one more.
Is there one we haven't talked about yet
that you're like, "Oh, we really got to cover this one."
- Let's do Cell Magics, right?
- Okay.
- If you maybe just Google for iPython Cell Magics.
- I'll gag you for it.
Yeah, they're not actually,
they are not strictly a Jupyter thing,
but I think they're a not so well-known thing
that is super neat.
And they are, since Jupyter itself started in,
from, was born out of IPython,
these are things that are also built into IPython.
So one of them is, for example, percent debug.
So when you have a notebook open and you get an exception
and your code gives you an error message,
you can then in a cell directly below that type
percent debug and that will open up a debugger session
that takes you directly to the point
where your code fail, right?
So if you write something like, I don't know,
I access foo, the array foo,
at an index position of five, right?
And that's where your code fails.
you can do %debug and look at,
well, at that point in the execution,
what was actually stored in the list foo?
And did it actually have five elements
or did I run out of bounds?
So like whenever I get an error
during an execution of a notebook and it's not obvious,
I like to use %debug to find out
what's going wrong with my code.
- Very nice.
- Another one that is very useful is %time.
which is a, have you used that?
- No, but I often want to answer this question.
I'm like, is this getting a little bit faster
or a little bit slower?
And I don't really want to go into a profiler
and I don't want to go to like write the date time
or timestamp code to like print it out myself.
It's just like, yeah.
- I use it a lot in those situations where like,
I've got way A to do something
and wait B to do something, right?
And then I wonder, is this actually faster
or is this actually performance wise worse
than doing it the other way?
And this gives you just a very quick and dirty answer
to like orders of magnitude.
Is this the same level
or should I be doing things differently?
It's very useful for that.
- Yeah, percent time and some function call
and see what it takes.
- It's brilliant.
And then another one I want to mention
is just exclamation point and then the shell command.
It's very useful for--
I think it's also available as %sx.
So it's basically a shorthand.
So you can do exclamation point ls to do a directory listing
just to see what is in the directory.
or you can do, I don't know,
who am I to see what user you're running something as,
or you can ping a machine to see if it's up
directly from your notebook.
So this is a quick and dirty way
of running command line commands
without having to leave your notebook.
- It's really cool.
You know, if you wouldn't just interact
with the file system,
or you see what files are available to me,
or all these things, right?
You wouldn't know because this hasn't published yet,
but in the sequence of when these shows come out,
I just talked to,
or you're rooting from a data science command line.
Have you seen this book?
- No.
- Yeah.
Yeah, so it's got a bunch of interesting things
that you can do on the command line for like querying data
or running things in parallel,
and a whole bunch of these,
these sort of ideas of like,
how do I do really cool stuff with the shell?
And you just use your bang command
and they become integrated into your notebook, right?
Which is, I think that's super cool.
- I mean, you can even take it to do things
like you do an LS and then your Python session
gets past the contents of that directory as a list
and you can then use it as a variable
and assign that list a variable.
So it's like, that is really like easy,
but also like very shoddy way of listing
the directory contents very quickly.
- Yeah, I mean, you should probably use that.
- We shouldn't even mention that.
- Yeah, don't tell people that.
But if there's like really interesting stuff
that's happening on the shell, you wanna use,
like for example, there's this example says,
total lines equals, which is a Jupyter level command.
And then it says, bang, arrow to redirect input
of some text file word count dash L.
And that tells you how many lines are there.
Like, maybe you want to make this all Python.
So it doesn't, it's not powerful.
- Sure, if you want to package this up, right?
In a package, but if you only end up doing it once
and you just want to know how many lines there are,
that's a way to do it.
- Right, you're in like an exploratory situation, right?
You just generated this file.
Now you want to know, I don't know.
So there's, that's a really powerful one.
I'm glad you brought that up.
And then just the last one from there is--
because it definitely saved me in a couple of very hairy
situations-- is %history.
So that basically gives you a history of the 20, 10,
or however many last commands you executed in a Python
session.
Why it's sometimes useful is just
imagine you accidentally delete a cell in a notebook.
I mean, you can always undo that, right?
But every once in a while,
your undo history is so horribly messed up
that you somehow sort of lost that cell forever.
And there was like a lot of finely tuned code in that.
So you can go back to that with percent history
and get your deleted cells from beyond the grave.
- Yeah, and you can do percent history dash in five.
Just show me the last five changes.
Yeah, it's really nice.
Cool.
All right, Marcus, I think we might be out of time,
but what a cool project this awesome list is.
- Yeah, I just like, we've got a lot of people listening in.
I'm sure there's a lot more awesome packages,
tools, resources that could and should go on this list.
So if whoever is watching or listening to this
has a package that they feel should be mentioned there,
it's just as easy as doing a pull request
and adding your favorite tool or resource to that list.
We're very inclusionist on the list, right?
We like to include people's suggestions.
- Yeah, fantastic.
There's a couple that I could see showing up there,
like a few comments in the live stream
Those could be PR, so have at it.
That'd be awesome.
Yeah. - Awesome.
- All right, final two questions
before I let you out of here though.
If you're gonna write some Python code,
what editor do you use these days?
- Jupyter, of course.
I overuse it.
- Beautiful.
And then notable PyPI or conda package
or something out there, or even a Jupyter plugin.
I know basically this entire show
has been one after another,
but something you wanna give a shout out to.
If I can just give one a shout out, it's Altair.
- Yeah.
- You should be doing your plotting in Altair.
- Altair, right on, yeah, it's quite nice.
All right, well, thank you so much for being here.
It's been great to have you on the show.
- Thank you for having me.
- Yeah, you bet, bye.
- Have a good one, bye.